Asthma is a chronic inflammatory airway
disease that causes variable and often reversible airflow
obstruction.
Patients experience wheezing, coughing,
chest tightness,
and shortness of breath.
But for respiratory therapists, the key is
not just hearing
wheezing, it's determining how well the
patient is actually moving
air and whether they are at risk of
respiratory failure.
The underlying problem involves airway
inflammation, bronchospasm,
and mucus production.
When a trigger is introduced, the airway
becomes swollen and
hyper-responsive.
Smooth muscle constricts, mucus increases,
and
the airway narrows.
This makes exhalation difficult, leading
to air trapping,
increased work of breathing, and possible
fatigue.
Early in an exacerbation, patients often
hypermalate and have a
low PaCO2.
But as they tire, PaCO2 may rise,
which is a dangerous sign of worsening
ventilation.
Common triggers include allergens,
exercise, cold
air, respiratory infections, smoke,
and strong odors.
And identifying these is important for
long-term control.
Clinically, patients may present with
wheezing,
dyspnea, cough, accessory muscle use,
and difficulty speaking.
But a key red flag is a silent chest,
which
can indicate severe obstruction and
minimal airflow.
Diagnostics include spirometry, showing a
decreased FEV1 over FVC ratio
that improves with bronchodilator therapy,
confirming reversible obstruction.
Peak flow helps assess severity, with 80
to 100% of
personal best considered green, 50 to 79%
yellow,
and below 50% red zone, indicating severe
risk.
ABGs are also important, as a rising PaCO2
during distress
suggests impending ventilatory failure.
Treatment focuses on relieving
bronchospasm and controlling inflammation.
Short-acting beta agonists like albuterol
provide rapid bronchodilation, while
inhaled corticosteroids are the foundation
of long-term control.
In moderate to severe exacerbations,
ipratropium may be added,
and systemic steroids are used to reduce
inflammation.
In severe cases known as status
asthmaticus, the patient does
not respond to standard treatment and may
require escalation, including
possible mechanical ventilation.
In these situations, the goal is to
prevent air trapping
by allowing longer expiratory time and
avoiding breath stacking.
The respiratory therapist plays a critical
role in assessing ventilation,
oxygenation, breath sounds, peak flow,
and response to therapy, as well as
educating patients on
inhaler use and trigger avoidance.
The most important takeaway is that asthma
is a dynamic airflow problem.
Never judge severity by wheezing alone.
A patient who becomes quieter, more
fatigued,
or shows a rising PaCO2 is not improving,
they are
getting worse, and recognizing that early
can save a life.